# catalina-traits

**Abstract**
Increased impacts from anthropogenic stressors are motivating the search for novel tools and approaches to understand ecosystem shifts and community change. While trait-based approaches have provided powerful tools for many taxa, the functional ecology of marine macroalgae remains rooted in functional group models from the 1980’s. Thus, we seek a core set of macroalgae traits critical to capture the diversity of ecological strategies that maintain ecological functions in a changing ocean. We first measure and analyze a large number of functional traits then use quantitative methods and literature to select six core traits that capture the same ecological strategies. We chose rocky intertidal sites as they compress large shifts in environmental drivers into a small scale and chose seven morphologically diverse species collected across habitats and seasons. In both data sets (16 vs 6 traits), we discovered a resource acquisition tradeoff along an axis of variation that maximizes height to facilitate resource acquisition by preemptive capture or relative surface area to increases uptake efficiency at lower resource supplies. Being taller, however, requires strength to resist disturbance (drag), while individuals with more surface area are shorter and weaker. Thus, we posit only six core traits are needed to capture ecological strategies for intertidal macroalgae, streamlining future research. Our results provide a roadmap for selecting traits that can rapidly advance exploration of trait-based ecology in other macroalgal-dominated ecosystems, providing a strong foundation to continue developing trait-based ecology for macroalgae across systems.
